STOCK EXCHANGE PALACE
CROATIAN NATIONAL BANK BUILDING
This impressive building
at Hrvatskih Velikana Square
houses the Croatian National Bank
which was opened on 18 June 1927
as the Palace of the Zagreb
Stock and Commodity Exchange.
In 1907, the Commodities and
Stocks Section was established.
MIRA KOLAR-DIMITRIJEVIĆ, PhD
historian
It was sometimes called the
Exchange, but documents show
that it was actually called
the Section for Trading in
Commodities and Stocks.
Initially, brokers gathered
in the Grand Café here.
A few years later they moved to a
new trading house in Jurišić Street
and then again in 1921 to an even
larger rented office in Hatz Street.
Many people saw themselves
getting rich with a fortune
to provide for them for the rest
of their lives, newspapers wrote.
They were always talking about
making one more final transaction
before quitting the slippery slope
that the stock exchange was.
And it was this very last trade
that would cost them their fortune.
Soon the Stock Exchange Council
purchased land in Drašković Street
and invited six top architects
to submit their designs.
The palace should
have an imposing exterior
without unnecessary ornamentation
so that its serious and solid
design fits into the neighbourhood
which will become the city's
commercial and trading centre,
specified the invitation
to submit bids.
After long deliberation, the jury
decided to give the project
to the creative and professionally
very daring architect Viktor Kovačić.
Kovačić not only provided an
outstanding design for the palace,
but was also the only candidate
who submitted the design for
the entrance to the new part of the city.
He approached every task
in an individual manner,
without repeating any element
from any previous design projects.
ALEKSANDER LASLO
architectural engineer
The main theme
in this case was an idea
which could be defined as
an insistence on excellence.
This is why he is considered
the founder of
the Zagreb School of Architecture.
Kovačić was a genius from Hum on
Sutla and Otto Wagner's student.
Before the project
for the Stock Exchange Palace,
he had mostly designed family
homes and blocks of flats.
He had only one
monumental project:
The Parish Church of Saint Blaise.
Kovačić showed a strange tenacity
when he decided to devote
himself to the city of Zagreb.
The building was controversial due
to its seemingly retrograde facade,
which is neoclassical.
However, if you look
at its spatial organisation
and the elements of its construction,
the building is truly modernist.
Work started in 1923, but
since Kovačić died a year later,
the supervision of the project
was taken over by Hugo Ehrlich.
I would call it a virtuoso
composition in the third dimension.
When you analyse the main
cross-section of the building,
when you notice the manipulation
of heights, levels and floors,
the skill as well as the brilliant
purity of the spatial organisation,
you realise that the building remains
almost unsurpassed even today.
The detailed documents illustrate
the capabilities of the suppliers
operating at
the time of construction.
The investors checked
a wide range of offers
in order to find the best materials
and the most up-to-date equipment,
from special scales
and vaults to safe boxes.
The communication equipment
is something worth mentioning.
Internal communication equipment
was installed in all the major offices.
A telephone exchange enabled
simultaneous use by multiple users.
It was so successful that
the consulate in Switzerland
was asked to find out more about
it at the Zurich Stock Exchange.
However, construction work did
not progress according to the plan,
and many contractors blamed
each other for the delays.
This way they stood to lose
the money they had paid
as a guarantee for
timely completion.
It takes six times longer
to put the stone blocks in place,
complained constructors from
Skopal, Juričić and Batušić.
They put the blame
on the supplier of stone blocks
and asked to change the procedure
and get compensated for lost time.
The Stock Exchange shareholders
wanted the building to stand out.
They ordered
custom-designed furniture
to demonstrate the strength
and stability of the institution.
The ambitions plans were finalised
a couple of months before the start
of an unprecedented
global financial crisis,
and they almost ended
in complete failure.
As long as we hoped to cover the
cost of the palace construction,
we did not turn for help
to anyone, they wrote.
The shareholders
appealed to the directors
of the First Croatian Savings Bank,
the Croatian Discount Bank
and five more large banks.
To complete the palace, they
needed another ten million dinars,
in addition to the five million
they were hoping to borrow
interest-free from the government.
The banks were luckily
willing to give them a loan
and the new Stock Exchange was
opened on Saturday, 18 June 1927.
The dignitaries who
walked into this lobby
to the applause of the stock
exchange brokers and members
included representatives of the
stock exchanges from Vienna,
Prague, Budapest, Ljubljana,
Novi Sad and Belgrade,
government and church officials,
and a delegation from Belgrade
including the King's emissary,
Army General Marković,
and the Minister
of Finance Dr Spaho.
Due to its reputation abroad and the
authority of its arbitration tribunal,
our stock exchange has
become an important institution
not only in the city of Zagreb,
but in the entire Kingdom,
said the Stock Exchange
President, Dr Stanko Šverljuga.
According to the program
for the opening ceremony,
we know that the gallery
was reserved for ladies,
and that there was a formal
lunch at the Esplanade Hotel.
Visitors were not only impressed
by the palace's architecture
as the palace had its
own telephone exchange,
electricity transformer station,
library, reading room, post office,
printing works offices,
restaurant and a doctor.
The palace also had central heating
and was partially air conditioned.
The guests left, and,
on the following Monday,
the offices were put into use
by stock exchange brokers.
There were not
many brokers at the time:
only about ten dealing in securities
and even fewer in commodities.
It was not necessary
to have more brokers
since the stock exchange members
could call out bids themselves here.
Brokers needed to be involved
only in closing transactions.
Trading would start every working
day at noon, lasting for an hour.
It was made easier
by the latest technology:
there were 52 telephone
booths with light signals in the hall,
which enabled the brokers to
receive instruction from their clients.
A number of booths
were also used by banks
to communicate directly
with the Stock Exchange.
The hall had a clock
that was automatically aligned with
all the other clocks in the building:
time was literally money here!
The hall is topped by a double
dome ensuring excellent acoustics.
The space between the inner and
the outer dome provided insulation
and the ventilation openings gave
air to the often heated atmosphere.
The Great Depression was
not felt in the country in 1929,
but there was a political crisis then.
The economic crisis started
only in the autumn of 1931,
with the collapse of the
First Croatian Savings Bank.
Commissioners were appointed to
head all the monetary institutions,
including the Zagreb Stock
Exchange which continued working.
Activities were, however, reduced
and it was not allowed
to trade in foreign exchange,
but it helped the country
get out of the crisis
as the employees
spoke German well,
and thus helped Yugoslavia enter
trading agreements with Germany.
This happened in 1934
when the Third Reich started
purchasing all the market surpluses
produced in Yugoslavia.
The stock exchange listed about 20
monetary institutions, companies
which were top players in the
Croatian economy at the time.
Among the most traded stocks
were those of the Isis company
- a joint stock company
for drugs and chemicals,
the Slavonija Timber company, the
Dubrovnik Steamship Navigation
and the Adriatic Hotels and Resorts
company of Sušak.
Once a transaction was closed,
the traded securities were brought
from the vaults below the hall.
The Gremial Hall was where
the last checks were performed.
Later on, the counting
office was located in the hall,
and today it is used by
specialists looking for forgeries.
This is the Commodity
Exchange Hall.
The commodities traded here
included eggs from Croatia,
Bosnia and Steiermark
and coffee from Costa Rica,
Guatemala, Columbia
and many other countries.
The 1926 trading list also included
soap, prunes, lard, marmalade,
blue vitriol, and even petrol.
The Zagreb Stock Exchange was
very proud of its arbitration tribunal
which business people would turn
to rather than to the state courts.
The tribunal held its session in this
hall, known today as the Horseshoe
below the slogan Law and
Justice etched into this plate.
In December 1931,
the arbitration tribunal heard
the case of the Croatian Bank
which sued the Credit
Institution of Ljubljana for refusing
to recognise and
settle a transaction
related to 4,000
war-damage bonds.
The case was unanimously ruled
in favour of the Croatian Bank.
The Stock Exchange was managed
by the Zagreb Stocks
and Commodities Council
whose sessions were
held in this hall.
The Council was authorised
to issue licenses to brokers,
appoint the commission
responsible for exchange rates,
approve the listing of new shares
and generally run the Stock
Exchange operations. Today,
this is where the Croatian National
Bank Council holds its meetings.
The Council is the highest authority
in the Croatian National Bank
and it is headed by the
Governor of the Bank.
The Great Depression
was not the only issue
worrying the Zagreb Stock
Exchange Council in the late 1920s.
Competitors from Belgrade,
supported by the
King's minister Kumandi,
wanted to find a way to close
down the Zagreb Stock Exchange
and merge it with the
exchange in Belgrade.
The minutes of the meetings of the
Stock Exchange managing board
make up for a very interesting read.
At the session held on 21 March
1928, certain listings were deleted,
new ones were added,
and it was also decided
that the Stock Exchange
would donate 1000 dinars
for the erection of
a statue of King Tomislav.
Many other requests
for donations were rejected,
and master Kordić was
granted a 50% discount on his rent
for the first semester due to illness.
All this was witnessed
by the Stock Exchange Secretary,
who lived in a luxury
flat in the building.
The start of the Second World War
coincided with a further
reduction in trading activities.
And in 1942
the building was forcefully
"rented" to the Ministry of Justice.
The end of the war also saw
the end of the Stock Exchange.
The Yugoslav communist
regime closed the Stock Exchange,
seized its property
and laid off its employees.
Since the Zagreb Stock
Exchange is no longer in operation,
I have to relieve you of your duties,
wrote Eugen Senji, the provisional
receiver of the confiscated assets,
to Stjepan Fritz, the treasurer.
The building was soon overtaken
by a branch office of the
National Bank of Yugoslavia
and the Social Accounting Service.
Upon the independence
of the Republic of Croatia,
the building of the former Stock
and Commodity Exchange
became the home to one of the
most important state institutions,
the Croatian National Bank.
The claws that once symbolised the
strength of the Croatian economy
are today in the service
of the stability of the kuna.
The Croatian National Bank was
established on 23 December 1991,
and the provisional
currency, the Croatian dinar,
entered circulation
on the same day.
Once inflation was put under control
by the 1993 Stabilisation Programme,
the kuna was introduced
as currency on 30 May 1994.
The Croatian National Bank
is an independent state institution,
and its main goal is price stability.
It defines monetary
and foreign exchange policy,
manages the foreign exchange
reserves, issues banknotes
as well as coins, and
supervises the credit institutions
and payment
operations in the country.
The work and
expertise of its employees
have made it
a modern central bank
operating in accordance with
the standards of the European Union.